Error handling is easy, right?
Your application just writes
some error message to the screen
and it exits.
Yeah, true, but at
the end of the day,
it's a bit more
sophisticated than that,
because error messages
that don't make any sense
are quite frustrating.
So it requires a bit more work.
And especially, it requires
a switch of perspective.
You have to put
yourself in the shoes
of the user of your
application and make sure
that an error
message makes sense
from that person's perspective.
And that requires quite a
bit of imagination and work.
Consider this very
simple module.
It just defines a single
function, random_bitvector.
And that takes n as an argument.
And that number is the
length of the vector,
which is going to be produced.
vector is the name of
the resulting vector.
It is logical.
It is one-dimensional.
And it's allocatable.
We also require a
one-dimensional array
of real values, which is the
same size as our bitvector,
but which we need in order
to use the random number
subroutine of Fortran.
So we allocate both arrays,
real_vector and vector.
We call the random number
intrinsic subroutine,
to initialize real_vector.
And we initialize
the logical values
of vector just by
evaluating an inequality.
And finally, we can
deallocate real_vector,
because it has
served its purpose.
The program compilation
unit is straightforward.
We call a subroutine
get_arguments,
which is defined in
this compilation unit,
and we create a bitvector using
the random_bitvector function,
which we defined
in the random_mod.
And then we print finally,
the count of the bitvector,
so basically, the number
of logical true values
in our bitvector.
There is some error handling in
the get_arguments subroutine.
So it's intended to
initialize number of values,
the length of our bitvector.
The first thing we check
is how many command
line arguments were
actually given when
the application is launched.
And if that is not
equal to 1, then we
write an error message
telling that we
expect a single argument that
should be the number of values
for the bitvector.
And we stop, if that's the
case with a stop code, 1.
If that's not the
case, we continue.
And we get the first
command line argument,
store that into a
character array buffer.
Then we use a read
statement in order
to read an integer
from that buffer.
But we specify the optional
arguments io_msg and io_stat.
So if the io_stat
is not equal to 0,
then we have an error condition.
And again, we write an
error message to error_unit.
And we use the message
which was actually returned
by the read statement, in order
to clarify what went wrong.
And again, we stop with
a different stop code,
since this is a different
error condition.
When we build and run the
application with a large value
for the number of
values, then you
see that we get a runtime error.
But that is from the
user's perspective,
not really informative.
Because what type of memory
is being allocated here?
It's not clear.
So although this
error message may
be informative to
the programmer,
it's definitely not very
informative to a user
of this application.
It's not so hard
to improve things.
If we add an optional argument
to the allocate statement that
will hold the value
that represents
whether the allocation
was successful or not,
then we can actually do
our own error handling
and make error messages
more informative.
So that happens for both
allocation statements.
And they have a
different error message,
which is printed when
something goes wrong.
When you compile and
run the application,
you see that indeed now we get
a different error message, which
is slightly more informative.
But still, what's
the temporary vector?
So from the perspective
of the user,
the error may not have handled
at the ideal level yet.
Rather than just stopping
the application when
an error occurs in the
allocate statement,
we need a way to propagate
that up to the calling context.
So in this case, to
the program unit.
And the way to do that is to
add an optional argument, ierr,
to the signature
of the function.
If that argument is
present, then the ierr
is set to a non-zero value, and
the execution of the function
is stopped, returning
to the calling context.
On the other hand, if the
optional argument is not
present, then we simply write
an error message to error unit,
and we stop the application.
When we call the function
in the program unit,
we supply an additional
argument status.
And we check for its value.
If it's non-zero, that
indicates that random bitvector
has had a problem while it
was creating the bitvector.
And we do some error handling.
So in this case, we can give
a more meaningful message
to the user in the sense
that the user doesn't really
care whether it was a temporary
array, which could not
be allocated or whether
it was the bitvector.
He just cares about
the fact that there
was a problem with
the bitvector size
that he specified
on the command line.
And finally, we stop the
application in that case.
We can add a bit
more error handling
to the get_arguments subroutine.
If the user specifies a negative
value for the number of values,
then it results in a
bitvector with length 0, which
is probably not what
the user had in mind.
So we add an extra test to see
whether the number of values
that was entered is negative.
And if so, we print
an error message,
and we stop the application.
When we build and
run the application
with a negative
command line argument,
you see that we get a
meaningful error message.
Errors can be handled at various
levels in your application.
Doing it at the
level that makes most
sense to the users of your
application, that's the trick.